Optking (#2727)
psi4/psi4: doc/sphinxman/source/optking.rst

Geometry Optimization
=====================

.. codeauthor:: Rollin A. King and Alexander G. Heide
.. sectionauthor:: Rollin A. King, Alexander G. Heide, and Lori A. Burns

*Module:* :ref:`Keywords <apdx:optking>`, `OPTKING <https://github.com/psi-rking/optking>`_

> |PSIfour| carries out molecular optimizations using a python module called

Author: Should optking be in the preceding section, under

```
The following are also required for |PSIfour|, but if not detected, the
build system will automatically download and build.
```
I could remove the download from source from cmake.

> |PSIfour| carries out molecular optimizations using a python module called

Reviewer: I agree it's ambiguous what section in build_planning.rst optking should go in. On one hand, optking isn't _used_ until runtime. On the other hand, since we're requiring it, it will be built at buildtime if missing. I think just choose a place for the bullet that seems reasonable. Definitely do leave the downloading of src from cmake as-is.

.. code-block:: none

   set optking {
     ranged_distance = ("
       1  3 0.949 0.95
       2  4 0.949 0.95
     ")
   }

Note that the effect of the frozen and ranged keywords is independent of
how the geometry of the molecule was input (whether Z-matrix or cartesian, etc.)..
RANGED_DIHEDRAL

* To scan the potential energy surface by optimizing at several fixed values
  of the dihedral angle of HOOH.

.. code-block:: none

   molecule hooh {
     0 1
     H  0.850718   0.772960    0.563468
     O  0.120432   0.684669   -0.035503
     O -0.120432  -0.684669   -0.035503
     H -0.850718  -0.772960    0.563468
   }
   
   set {
     basis cc-pvdz
     intrafrag_step_limit 0.1
   }

   lower_bound = [99.99, 109.99, 119.99, 129.99, 149.99]
   upper_bound = [100, 110, 120, 130, 140, 150]
   PES = []

   for lower, upper in zip(lower_bound, upper_bound):
   my_string = f"1 2 3 4 {lower} {upper}"
   set optking ranged_dihedral = $my_string
   E = optimize('scf')
   PES.append((upper, E))

   print("\n\tcc-pVDZ SCF energy as a function of phi\n")
   for point in PES:
     print("\t%5.1f%20.10f" % (point[0], point[1]))

> * To scan the potential energy surface without the |optking__ranged_dihedral| keyword a zmatrix

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* To scan the potential energy surface without the |optking__ranged_dihedral| keyword, a zmatrix
```

  can be used. **Warning!** rotating dihedrals in large increments without allowing the molecule to relax
  in between increments can lead to unphysical geometries with overlapping functional groups in larger molecules.

.. code-block:: none

   molecule hooh {
     0 1 
     H   
     O 1 0.95
     O 2 1.39 1 103 
     H 3 0.95 2 103 1 D 

     D = 99

     units ang 
   }

   set {
     basis cc-pvdz
     intrafrag_step_limit 0.1 
     frozen_dihedral (" 1 2 3 4 ")
   }

   dihedrals = [100, 110, 120, 130, 140, 150]
   PES = []

   for phi in dihedrals:
     hooh.D = phi 
     E = optimize('scf')
     PES.append((phi, E))

   print("\n\tcc-pVDZ SCF energy as a function of phi\n")
   for point in PES:
     print("\t%5.1f%20.10f" % (point[0], point[1]))

Multi-Fragment Optimizations
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. _DimerSection:

> Control over the intermolecular coordinates are controlled through |optking__interfrag_mode|,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The intermolecular coordinates are controlled through |optking__interfrag_mode|,
```

|optking__frag_ref_atoms|, and |optking__interfrag_coords|.

> * To specify the reference points to use for coordinates |optking__frag_ref_atoms| is
>   specified. Each list corresponds to a fragment. A list of indices denotes a linear combination

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Specify the reference points to use for coordinates via |optking__frag_ref_atoms|. A list of indices denotes a linear combination
```

     C       -7.111625      1.067403     -0.697024
     C       -6.810717     -1.314577     -0.707746
     C       -6.821873     -1.322226      0.678369
     C       -7.122781      1.059754      0.689090
     H       -7.226173      2.012097     -1.240759
     H       -6.687348     -2.253224     -1.259958
     H       -6.707325     -2.266920      1.222105
     H       -7.246150      1.998400      1.241304
     O       -6.944245     -0.111984     -2.805375
     H       -7.058224      0.807436     -3.049180
     C       -6.990227     -0.143507      2.907714
     H       -8.018305     -0.274985      3.264065
     H       -6.592753      0.807024      3.281508
     H       -6.368443     -0.968607      3.273516
     nocom
     unit angstrom
   }
   
   # Create a python dictionary and convert to string for pass through to optking
   MTdimer = """{
      "Natoms per frag": [12, 16],
      "A Frag": 1,
      "A Ref Atoms": [[1, 3, 4, 6, 8], [8], [11]],
      "A Label": "methylthiophene",
      "B Frag": 2,
      "B Ref Atoms": [[13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18], [13], [15]],
      "B Label": "tyrosine",
      "Frozen": ["theta_A", "theta_B", "tau", "phi_A", "phi_B"],

>    }"""

Reviewer: It could be good to have a pytest test, maybe in test_addons.py, showing the passing through of optking opts in psiapi where you shouldn't have to resort to stringifying the dict.

   PES.append((upper, E))

   print("\n\tcc-pVDZ SCF energy as a function of phi\n")
   for point in PES:
     print("\t%5.1f%20.10f" % (point[0], point[1]))

* To scan the potential energy surface without the |optking__ranged_dihedral| keyword, a zmatrix
  can be used. **Warning!** rotating dihedrals in large increments without allowing the molecule to relax
  in between increments can lead to unphysical geometries with overlapping functional groups in larger molecules.

.. code-block:: none

   molecule hooh {
     0 1 
     H   
     O 1 0.95
     O 2 1.39 1 103 
     H 3 0.95 2 103 1 D 

     D = 99

     units ang 
   }

   set {
     basis cc-pvdz
     intrafrag_step_limit 0.1 
     frozen_dihedral (" 1 2 3 4 ")
   }

   dihedrals = [100, 110, 120, 130, 140, 150]
   PES = []

   for phi in dihedrals:
     hooh.D = phi 
     E = optimize('scf')
     PES.append((phi, E))

   print("\n\tcc-pVDZ SCF energy as a function of phi\n")
   for point in PES:
     print("\t%5.1f%20.10f" % (point[0], point[1]))

Multi-Fragment Optimizations
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. _DimerSection:

In previous versions of optking, the metric for connecting atoms was increased until all atoms,

> were connected. This is the current behavior for |optking__frag_mode| `singleo`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
were connected. This is the current behavior for |optking__frag_mode| `single`.
```

Setting |optking__frag_mode| to `multi` will now add a special
set of intermolecular coordinates between fragments - internally referred to as DimerFrag

> coordinates. For a set of molecular fragments, a set of reference points are chosen on each

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
coordinates. For each pair of molecular fragments, a set of up to 3 reference points are chosen on each
```

> fragment. The reference points may be an atom or a linear combination of atomic positions.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
fragment.  Each reference point will be either an atom or a linear combination of positions of atoms within that fragment.
```

Stretches, bends, and dihedral angles between two of the fragments will be created using

> these reference points. Up to six reference points will be created (depending upon the number

Reviewer 3: Suggest deleting the sentence that begins with "Up to six..."

of atoms in each fragment). See :ref:`Dimer coordinate table <table:DimerFrag>` for how
reference points are created. For a set of three dimers A, B, and C, sets of coordinates are

> created between each pair: AB, AC, and BC. Each DimerFrag will likely use different reference

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
created between each pair: AB, AC, and BC. Each DimerFrag may use different reference
```

points. Creation of the intermolecular coordinates can be controlled through
|optking__interfrag_mode|, |optking__frag_ref_atoms|, and |optking__interfrag_coords|. 

> .. note:: Manually creating the interfragment coordinates is meant for power users.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
.. note:: Manual specification of the interfragment coordinates is supported for power users, and provides complete control of fragments' relative orientation.
```

  of the benzene ring.

.. code-block:: none

   memory 4GB 
   molecule mol {
       0 1 
       O   -0.5026452583       -0.9681078610       -0.4772692868
       H   -2.3292990446       -1.1611084524       -0.4772692868
       H   -0.8887241813        0.8340933116       -0.4772692868
       --  
       0 1 
       C    0.8853463281       -5.2235996493        0.5504918473
       C    1.8139169342       -2.1992967152        3.8040686146
       C    2.8624456357       -4.1143863257        0.5409035710
       C   -0.6240195463       -4.8153482424        2.1904642137
       C   -0.1646305764       -3.3031992532        3.8141619690
       C    3.3271056135       -2.6064153737        2.1669340785
       H    0.5244823836       -6.4459192939       -0.7478283184
       H    4.0823309159       -4.4449979205       -0.7680411190
       H   -2.2074914566       -5.7109913627        2.2110247636
       H   -1.3768100495       -2.9846751653        5.1327625515
       H    4.9209603634       -1.7288723155        2.1638694922
       H    2.1923374156       -0.9964630692        5.1155773223
       nocom
       units au
   }
   
   set {
       basis 6-31+G 

>        frag_mode MULTI

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
       frag_mode MULTI
       The line below specifies the reference points that will be used to construct the interfragment coordinates between the two fragments (called A and B).  The format is the following:
       [[A-1], [A-2], [A-3]], [[B-1], [B-2], [B-3]]
 In terms of atoms within each fragment, the line below chooses, for water:

H3 of water for the first reference point, O1 of water for the second reference point, H2 of water for the third reference point

and for benzene:

the mean of the positions of all the C atoms, C2, one of the Carbon atoms, C6, another one of the carbon atoms.
```

Reviewer 3: @AlexHeide , I am concerned that this example may now not be correct.  In order to support trimers, etc., I changed the atoms numbering to the total atom number - not the number within the fragment.  See e.g., test_dimers_ne2.py for the simplest example that also uses frag_ref_atoms.

Author: Yep. Tests got updated but my examples didn't. Good catch.

    continuous way.

.. code-block:: none

   molecule hooh {
     0 1 
     H   
     O 1 0.95
     O 2 1.39 1 103 
     H 3 0.95 2 103 1 D 

     D = 99

     units ang 
   }

   set {
     basis cc-pvdz
     intrafrag_step_limit 0.1 
     frozen_dihedral (" 1 2 3 4 ")
   }

   dihedrals = [100, 110, 120, 130, 140, 150]
   PES = []

   for phi in dihedrals:
     hooh.D = phi 
     E = optimize('scf')
     PES.append((phi, E))

   print("\n\tcc-pVDZ SCF energy as a function of phi\n")
   for point in PES:
     print("\t%5.1f%20.10f" % (point[0], point[1]))

Multi-Fragment Optimizations
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. _DimerSection:

In previous versions of optking, the metric for connecting atoms was increased until all atoms,
were connected. This is the current behavior for |optking__frag_mode| `single`.
Setting |optking__frag_mode| to `multi` will now add a special
set of intermolecular coordinates between fragments - internally referred to as DimerFrag
coordinates (see `here <DimerIntro_>` for the brief description). 
For each pair of molecular fragments, a set of up to 3 reference points

> are chosen on each fragment. Each reference points will be either an atom or a linear combination

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
are chosen on each fragment. Each reference point will be either an atom or a linear combination
```

   for point in PES:
     print("\t%5.1f%20.10f" % (point[0], point[1]))

* To scan the potential energy surface without the |optking__ranged_dihedral| keyword, a zmatrix
  can be used. **Warning!** rotating dihedrals in large increments without allowing the molecule to relax
  in between increments can lead to unphysical geometries with overlapping functional groups in larger molecules.

.. code-block:: none

   molecule hooh {
     0 1 
     H   
     O 1 0.95
     O 2 1.39 1 103 
     H 3 0.95 2 103 1 D 

     D = 99

     units ang 
   }

   set {
     basis cc-pvdz
     intrafrag_step_limit 0.1 
     frozen_dihedral (" 1 2 3 4 ")
   }

   dihedrals = [100, 110, 120, 130, 140, 150]
   PES = []

   for phi in dihedrals:
     hooh.D = phi 
     E = optimize('scf')
     PES.append((phi, E))

   print("\n\tcc-pVDZ SCF energy as a function of phi\n")
   for point in PES:
     print("\t%5.1f%20.10f" % (point[0], point[1]))

Multi-Fragment Optimizations
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. _DimerSection:

The intermolecular coordinates are controlled through |optking__interfrag_mode|,
|optking__frag_ref_atoms|, and |optking__interfrag_coords|.

> * Specify the reference points to use for coordinates via |optking__frag_ref_atoms|.

Reviewer 2: I don't understand this section at all. What does "reference points to use for coordinates" mean? Am I expected to be able to follow this, or are you assuming the user has already ready some optking-specific documentation?

Author: No optking's documentation on this section is actually less detailed. I'll try to clarify that section and add a note that most users should just set `interfrag_mode` to `multi` and let optking handle coordinates.

  Each list corresponds to a fragment. A list of indices denotes a linear combination

>   of the atoms. In this case the first reference point for the second dimer is the center of the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  of the atoms. In this case, the first reference point for the second dimer is the center of the
```

  works well for systems with long 'arms' or floppy portions of a molecule poorly
  described by local internals.

* Optking does support the specification of ghost atoms. Certain internal coordinates such 
  as torsions become poorly defined when they contain near-linear bends. 
  An internal error `AlgError` may be raised in such cases. Optking will avoid such
  coordinates when choosing an initial coordinate system. In such cases, try
  restarting from the most recent geometry. Alternatively, setting |optking__opt_coordinates| 
  to cartesian will avoid any internal coordiante difficulties altogether. 
  These coordinate changes can be automatically performed by turning |optking__dynamic_level| to 1.

.. warning:: In some cases, such as the coordinate issues described above, optking will reset to maintain
  a consistent history. If an error occurs in Psi4 due to |optking__geom_maxiter| being exceeded but

>   the final step report indicates that optking has not taken |optking__geom_maxiter| steps such a 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  the final step report indicates that optking has not taken |optking__geom_maxiter| steps, such a 
```

Reviewer 2: Still need to adopt.
